all right uh hello and welcome to the
all over the map podcast uh I'm your
host James Lush and joining me today is
Travis christofferson Travis how are you
I'm doing good thanks James awesome cool
Travis uh thank you for doing this um so
I wanted to have you on because I had
read your book uh tripping over the
truth about uh two months ago and then
um I discovered you know not only you're
you're a great kind of wealth of
knowledge but you're also a really great
writer so I also read uh curable
recently and I know you have other books
but um just to kind of give the the
10,000 foot view of you you're you're an
author you've written three books uh
tripping over the truth about the
metabolic theory of cancer uh curable
about some of the inefficiencies and
biases in the Health Care System um and
then ketones as the fourth fuel which I
haven't read yet but I'm sure I will get
around to um and then you're also the
founder of care oncology and the
foundation for metabolic cancer
therapies which I hope we can kind of
talk about later on
today that all sound sound right okay
cool um well yeah before we get into
anything I kind of actually want to talk
a little bit about your writing career
but um you know that that's my
introduction of you if there's any
anything else you want to add anything
you're working on um feel free for for
those who don't know you no that's fair
let's just leave it there awesome cool
um okay so um before we get into any of
your your books or anything like that i'
would actually just kind of like to just
get to know you a little bit more so I
saw that um you attended um you attended
your under undergraduate at uh Montana
State and then you did a master's at
South Dakota School of minds and
Technology um what were you doing in the
years before writing books were you in
research Labs like what what got you
into into science writing yeah it was a
weird nonlinear route James like I I I
um after my undergrad which is a
wonderful experience at MSU they have an
honors program and I came in there
really directionless and not you know I
I had read I think some Carl San books
and I I love science but um one of my
first professors in molecular biology
class was this wonderful guy from
Princeton um who actually sent the first
monkey into space he was on the cover of
Life magazine and he started the class
with the big bang and how he heavy
elements are formed and
supernovas which the Prebiotic evolution
in life and that that hooked me I was
just wow this is incredible so that that
became I became passionate about that
then I went to after that I was going to
go to medical school and and really drug
my feet on on the week I was supposed to
move to go to medical school and and
went into uh the research lab at the
school of Minds where there was a
professor who had funding to support me
so I I went into that and I did um a
mobilized enzyme kinetics so it was it
was a biochemistry project and and then
left and went into the family business
with three credits left before I
graduated and then you know life just
went fast forward I I met my wife had
two kids and went Revisited them to
finish my masters about 10 years later
and that's when they allowed me to do um
an independent study class on cancer and
so I I was just leafing through what to
do it on and and and because cancer was
always you know of all the problems in
biology that was one that sort of loom
the largest at that time and still does
and uh was leaping through and I I found
this book on Kindle called cancer as a
metabolic Disease by Tom safreed and it
was $75 it was a textbook I almost
didn't buy it but I did I read it that
day and was just absolutely Blown Away
by it so I did that that independent
study project on that and I'd always
loved writing the in the honors program
of Montana State we did we had we had
classes where we just read books and
write essays about them um and so Tom's
book about cancer as a metabolic disease
was a textbook but it lended itself
beautifully to a story because it's a
story of redemption about this scientist
OT warberg um so that was the challenge
was to really you know extract this
hardcore science and and put it into a
story format where people could enjoy it
understand it and and get to know the
scientist right on that level so yeah
that that was the beginning of the
writing career the writing process
itself is is incredibly frustrating but
rewarding right you go through these
huge vicissitudes of this is horrible
you keep going through it you know and
few things take so long you put in that
much effort you have no idea if it's
going to be any good or not so um yeah
no that that was that was a Genesis of
the books awesome yeah thank you for
that background yeah I mean you're you
know I I think you know you're a very
talented writer I think what's one of
the more just kind of amazing things
about uh tripping over the truth is that
it I think you know it's only I cuz I I
read it two months ago and then I I I
read it again leading up to this and I
realiz it's only uh you know 264 Pages
before you get to the afterward and and
the uh the the references and like you
pack such an insane amount of
information into those 264 pages but
also um it's very accessible I think at
least to a lay reader I I have a science
background so I I might be you know it
might be harder for me to tell just how
easy it is to read but I do think I
could probably give it to to you know
just anybody I know and they would have
an enjoyable time reading from it and
and learn a lot and so um that was one
of the big questions I actually had for
you just again as as a science writer is
like how do you how do you tow that line
of like knowing when to go into a deep
explanation on a topic and really you
know have to get into some of the
nitty-gritty science pieces um versus
you know knowing when to keep it high
level I also think you do a great job of
of knowing when to to weave in like
analogies and metaphors that really help
kind of people understand the concept um
so so how do you kind of how do you
balance that it's yeah that part's hard
but I try to write it in in again like a
story format where you are you you step
away from kind of yourself and and you
you tell the story from the perspective
of the the people that were doing the
research right so so and then you and
the way I would do it is try to find
somebody that you you hopefully would
like to impress and write to them like
to me it was it was my brother I was
writing to my brother the whole time um
and so you have a consistent voice right
and and yeah hardcore
topics uh you there's a great quote by
Einstein if you can't teach something to
a third grader then you don't know it
well yourself so you just have to you I
think you really just need to try to
really have those Concepts anchored in
your mind and then you're able to
explain them simplistically right using
using metaphors and analogies but yeah
it's not it's not easy and then the
editorial process is where you you you
really scrub the rough edges off and
sand it and polish it and that that
that's the part where it gets
frustrating because that just takes a
long time you just go through it some
parts are clunky you rewrite them
hardest part of an author is is um
discarding something because it becomes
personal to you but yeah that just xing
out pages and starting over is is
critical yeah awesome um Okay cool so
without any more on that we can jump
into to the book here and so you kind of
answered it a little bit but I would
just love to know kind of what was um
the Genesis of the book for you was it
like right after you read Thomas C
Freed's book you just jumped into like I
need to explore this further and and
eventually you know maybe write a book
about it is that was that even on your
mind when you first read it what kind of
made it crystallized of like oh I have
to to write a book about this yeah it
really what it was was I read Tom's book
I was so passionate about the topic that
um and then within a few weeks after
that I'd read a book called emperor
maladies by S sadar Muki which is
absolutely brilliant book he's one of
the best science writers absolutely and
and that inspired me to write the story
because that that sto that was a
biography of cancer same sort of format
same style you know writing non
editorializing writing it through the
lens of the researchers um but he didn't
mention OT warberg once so it was to me
it was well this same kind of story
needs to be told but from the
perspective of a different view of what
cancer is right it became a itive story
at that point so you i' travel and
interview the scientists and then it
became really fun that's when it got so
engaging talking to bird vogelstein
talking to uh um Dr Peterson and Co and
Saed um yeah it's
it's to me it was a story that just
needs to be told and and it was
terrifying at that time like I just felt
what am I getting wrong someone's going
to read this and tell me I'm completely
full of you got all this wrong um
but it's snow since then has gotten more
and more
traction uh the part that really engaged
me was the where I delved into the most
science was the cancer genome Atlas
project looking at can the mutations in
cancer and trying to make sense the same
way that all these other scientists were
trying to make sense of what cancer is
through through a different lens so
there was just a lot going on at that
time period And I still today you know
it's it's a remarkable to me how much um
how much the resource has shifted
towards
metabolism yeah yeah well we'll
definitely get into the total cancer
genome Atlas because that was also for
me just one of the the most fascinating
parts of the book and um so before we go
any further I think um it'd be good to
just get it from you the explanation for
people who don't know because I still
don't think a lot of people know what is
the metabolic theory of
cancer yeah well okay so I guess the
best way to to explain it is contrasted
to what the current theory is which is
somatic mutation Theory and the way
cancer if you open up textbook the way
it'll describe cancer is there's a
sequential series of mutations to key
genes so there's two types of genes that
are responsible for cancer um anagen and
tumor suppressor genes so when there's
mutation to an Ena Gene typically it's
activated meaning that's like a gas
pedal telling the cell to divide then
when a tumor suppressor Gene has a
mutation it's like the break is broken
so the the the genes that are
responsible for regulating cellular
growth are are broken or mutated um
there's a series of of mutations to
these key genes that rewires the cell
towards uh towards un proliferated
growth that's the current dogmatic
explanation of cancer in a textbook um
there's also sort of a a a ancillary
Theory to that called the the uh the EMT
transition which is more of an
epigenetic explanation of cancer but the
two are are you know they're they're
they don't really they overlap a little
bit but not really the metabolic theory
of cancer is was started actually in
1924 by OT warberg when he noticed that
the cancer cells in general have a
completely different metabolism where
normal cells will will generate energy
with oxygen cancer cells revert to this
ancient sort of um mechanism of energy
generation called fermentation where
they they ferment blood glucose or
glucose sugar and kick out a byproduct
called lactic acid in the presence of
oxygen so it's a much less efficient
method of generating energy he had no
explanation for why the cancer cells
were doing this just that they were and
he he he claimed this was the origin of
cancer but he didn't have a
comprehensive Theory to explain it so
then you fast forward to Tom safreed he
went back and looked at all of the data
from warberg going back a hundred years
years and really finish the theory and
what his theory is is there's damage to
these cellular organel called
mitochondria the mitochondria are the
organells where energy is generated with
oxygen right so cancer cells are are
bypassing mitochondria there's damage to
mitochondria the cell reverts to this
different form of energy generation and
it does that through a epigenetic signal
from the mitochondria to the DNA and
this rewires the the genes that are
being expressed towards fermentation and
a different energy generation towards un
proliferated growth and and that's so
two very different theories right one
one is explaining cancer cell growth
through energy generation and damage to
mitochondria the other is explaining it
through damage to DNA and rewiring of of
sort of the cellular circuitry so that's
it in a nutshell and that you know the
debate is still going on to this day
yeah yeah I'm I'm glad you you let off
with uh comparing it to the sematic
mutation Theory because um like I said I
think that's you know whether I could
stop somebody on the street and they
would you know use the the phrase
sematic mutation Theory I I don't think
so but that's I think how most people's
conception um of of cancer just in in
the in the public um but also again
within a lot of the the medical
community um can you talk a bit about
how the sematic mutation Theory became
so uh so entrenched
um as as you know as dogma and really um
really was what kind of undergirded the
whole field of you know chemo therapy
and Drug development just how we treated
cancer um and even also how we how we
looked at it because I think that's
another really interesting uh piece that
you know um the sematic mutation Theory
contributes to whereas we view cancer as
this you know just uh
omniscient uh super villain that that
can can evade and it's so chaotic um
versus the the metabol Theory kind of
makes it seem um a little bit simpler
and a little bit more um you know of of
a adversary we can we can deal with um
so yeah if you can just explain again
yeah how the sematic mutation Theory
became the Dogma in uh the medical
community and the research Community
throughout the the uh 20th century yeah
yeah so if you if you go back
historically um the beginning of the
20th century right no one they did we
didn't know what cancer was we were
getting little Clues little little bits
of data to try trying to figure it out
War presented his theory in the 1920s he
said cancer was caused by uh the shift
of metabolism um another guy German
scientist and an Italian scientist
Hanselman and Bo noticed that the
chromosomes were damaged and they they
noticed this because another scientist
Walter Fleming discovered a Dy where you
could dye chromosomes that's where the
word chromosomes comes from Chromo
meaning color so they could finally view
chromosomes and they noticed in cancer
cells they were they were duplicated
ated they were deleted they were bent
broken so there they still didn't know
what chromosomes were you know they
didn't know where the seat of of genetic
material lie they just knew that they
probably were the chromosomes they knew
they were somehow important um so that
was that was the beginning of the
somatic mutation Theory then Along Came
pton Rouse who who was able to show that
uh viruses could cause cancer and no one
had any idea why so those three ideas of
cancer really competed no one knew which
one was right then in 1955 when DNA was
discovered to be the seat of all of the
genetic information all of the
information in the cell was right there
and now we knew where it was and they
began to to slowly elucidate how that
how that information was transferred
through a cell then we discovered that
there was mutations specific mutations
to these to DNA more of them in cancer
so then the somatic mutation Theory
started getting more weight still they
didn't know how the viral Theory fit in
there warberg was dead in 19 You Know by
1970 and his theory was completely
discarded um a a beautiful series of
experiments in 1976 by vmis and Bishop
is what cemented it what they did is
they had a cancer-causing
virus um the Ral saroma virus the
original one discovered by him it had
four genes in it they didn't know how
this virus was causing cancer
what they did is they found that one of
the genes the SRC Gene the saroma gene
that Gene is a gene that we all have
within us it's a kinas enzyme that is
responsible for regulating the cell
cycle cell division what that virus had
was a mutated version of that normal
Gene the onoff switch was broken and and
stuck in the on position so when that
virus infected us that Gene was inserted
into our DNA and gave the instructions
for cell to divide over and over so what
it what it was was a this complete
accidental merger of the viral Theory
into the somatic mutation Theory now
they realize that viruses were causing
cancer by inserting genes that we
already have in us a mutated version so
it could that's the viruses were doing
the same thing that would happen
accidentally inside us through random
mutations that would cause cancer so
that that's they won the Nobel Prize um
and then that cement to the somatic
mutation Theory and nobody looked back
this eered in the era of targeted
therapy now we know what we had to go
after we had to Target these genes these
tumor enogen and tumor suppressor genes
everybody thought cancer would be cured
within the next five years you know
direct quotes on that and here we are
today right the era of targeted therapy
has been a colossal disappointment um
the cancer genome Atlas project was able
to delve into these genomes with high
def and just reveal you know a wake of
confusion but yeah that I won't go any
further but that that that's how it got
cemented historically was those series
of experiments yeah and it it it almost
kind of Mak sense too for that uh time
period some of some of those promises
that were being made that you know we'll
cure cancer in 5 years we're going to
launch us all that war on cancer during
this time because you know at the time
we're also just having uh medical
breakthrough after breakthrough with you
know antibiotics and vaccines and
Insulin therapy and you know we're
coming off World War II um and so it it
I think almost psychologically kind of
makes sense for the country to have this
hubris that we're going to you know
we're going to do this too we're just
going to we're just going to tackle it
um and then of course we get the first
uh chemotherapies which came out of kind
of an unlikely uh place if if you want
to kind of tell that story a little bit
I I always find these kind of little um
divergences in in medical history so
interesting when you know you just have
some chance event that leads to um you
know a major breakthrough this story is
is is pretty interesting yeah the
chemotherapy one is yeah it's kind of um
it's fitting for sure but but the the
first chemotherapy and this came in in
you know the 1940s when the only
therapies for cancer were radiation and
surgery so you could deal with solid
tumors but but leukemias lymphomas there
was no solution to that um so it was
during World War II and the Allies
United States and our allies we had had
hidden a bunch of navy ships in the Bari
Harbor in Italy because it was thought
that the German LOF Offa was spread too
thin to to bomb them there so they were
kind of just stationed there
um suddenly they got attacked by the
lofa and and they Dro bombs into the
harbor they hit this ship the US John
Harvey which just happened to have 100 I
think it was
120,000 or 120,000 pounds of mustard gas
nitrogen mustard gas which was illegal
during World War II um because of the
treaty but both sides thought the other
side was violating the treaty so they
were stockpiling it um so it spread the
cloud of of nitrogen mustard gas over
the soldiers over the nearby town the
United States rushed over doctors to to
help and you know it was a horrific
accident people were blinded killed um
the doctors took back samples and
studied them at Yale what they found was
the what this gas did was depleted the
lymphoid tissue so the white blood cells
and and all the all the blood cells were
diminished in the lymphoid tissue and so
they just had this crazy idea well
that's what leukemia is is uncontrolled
white blood cell growth perhaps mustard
gas could be a chemotherapy for for
cancer where they had no other solution
so that they they injected mustard gas
into patients with leukemia and it
soften the lymph nodes right they they
had fleeting remissions but that's what
spurred this idea of a you know toxic
poisons for chemotherapy and it it's a
simple way it works it just binds up DNA
so you have fat fast growing cells which
is you know the def pathological
definition cancer it just locks up the
DNA so they can't divide so it's
extraordinarily non-targeted in Blunt so
it does that to every cell in the body
your gut cells your hair that's why your
hair falls off um very very
indiscriminantly and toxic but that yeah
that was the origin of
chemotherapy yeah you know it's it's a
terrible story but yeah also also
fascinating and then so um so yeah then
then through this time after you know
the 50s 60s 7s ' 80s and so on
um yeah we're getting you know more and
more of these more and more of these
drugs they're you know not necessarily
working great they're working you know
better in combination but still it's
absolute you know hell for patients as
it still largely is today um and then uh
kind of coming into into the 90s we also
have somebody who's who's uh Dr Peterson
who's now you know researching the
metabolic theory in the 90s but uh
before he kind of comes onto the scene
or or or makes um you know the the big
contributions uh we have the sequence of
the the human genome and kind of what
that led to and and maybe now we can
kind of get into the the tcga and and
what the the promise of that was and
what what ultimately happened there yeah
yeah yeah it's yeah with with the Advent
of nitrogen mustard gas that then the
chemist went to it right and and coming
at it from okay let's attack cell
division so they they developed a
handful of systemic chemotherapies into
the 50s and 60s
um then Nixon declared war on cancer in
197 71 which gave the NCI really you
know unprecedented power under the
chemotherapy developmental program so
these doctors at the time were
incredibly bold Frey fried Wright um
Vincent deita they took these toxins and
just pushed as hard as you could so so
childhood leukemia they were able to
affect a few diseases childhood leukemia
Hotchkins disease testicular cancer um
but it was at the expense it was you
know it was a it was a horrific scene
what what these patients were going
through there at at the time though they
they were convinced they were going to
cure cancer with this approach is they
they needed to figure out how how to
push harder and harder and they finally
hit the wall you know that that where
they were going to be able to go with
these
chemotherapies um then they didn't an
analysis in the 1980s how much how good
was this push and this use of
chemotherapy and the the analysis was
well they probably saved about 4% of the
people that had cancer but during that
time from 1950 to 1980 that overall
cancer death rate had increased
9% which is shocking and what does that
tell you it tells you that we just made
our world that much more carcinogenic to
where people were getting more cancer um
so we were losing the war you know and
then what happened 1976 again we went
through that series of experiments where
okay now we know what cancer is it's
genetic mutations we can Target those
you fast forward to the early 2000s in
these the first iteration of these
targeted therapies were somewhat hopeful
but when you again tally the data the
targeted therapies really were not a
drop in the bucket to the overall war
and cancer um so you get to the question
then you know in 19 in 2000 there was
the first rough draft of the human
genome and Bill Clinton announced it on
the White House lawn and it was really
again the American huus we thought we
were going to cure all diseases once we
had this map and that that was his
direct quote that once we have this map
like the map of Columbus we will
it will lead to the DI the diagnosis and
the curing of all diseases including
cancer so on the heels of that became
the cancer genom Matas project now we're
going to sequence all the DNA and all
the different cancer types finally find
the exact sequence of mutations that
each cancer type has so we will have a
fingerprint a blueprint to work off for
cures and that's what people thought we
would find was a tidy sequence that
would define each type of cancer because
the clinical data
really that's what it lended itself to
colon cancer cervical cancer they show
up in graded series of steps and it was
thought that each one of these steps was
under pended by specific mutations and
that's what we thought we would find
right this tidy sequence of mutations so
when that data first started coming out
it was just shocking because it it was
there was some order to it but it was
way more random than most people thought
um there was cancer types with with no
mutations
and and you have to distinguish between
what what they call driving mutations
and passenger mutations so there's a lot
of mutations in cancer cells but the the
only ones that makes sense in terms of
of cause and effect are driving
mutations that are mutations to these
tumor suppressors and Ana genes and
there's a lot of other mutations genes
that just don't matter for anything but
there was a they were finding all types
of cancer with one or two driving
mutations or none and it just made no
sense according to somatic mutation
Theory so there was a beautiful paper uh
I think it was 2012 by Bert vogelstein
who is one of the the main architects of
the sematic mutation Theory called dark
matter where he just asked that question
he's like we're finding all these tumors
with you know inexplicable few number of
driving mutations pediatric tumors with
no mutations um how do we explain this
in the current context of what cancer
biology is and he called dark matter
which you know in the physics version is
we don't know why the universe is is
moving the way it is we postulate
there's dark matter that is influencing
it same thing with cancer there was some
other something else driving it that
that the scientists didn't know about
and that's when guys like Thomas Aid
stepped into that confusion that void
and began offering up other explanations
yeah no it's it's yeah it was it was it
was fascinating cuz it's it's on its
face uh the TCG and the promise it just
it does sound so so logical that we will
of course here we will sequence these
tumors we'll find the exact patterns of
mutations in each cancer and then from
there we can uh create these targeted
drugs that go after those Cancers and it
just was not the case um which I just
found so fascinating about the book um
just to go back real quick I actually
want to talk quickly a bit more about
chemotherapy if you could explain the um
what the FDA approval criteria is for
chemotherapy because that was another
part of the book that really jumped out
to me and I think most people probably
just don't understand this difference
between um tumor shrinkage and actual uh
survival um and and also that that NCI
budget how big it is and just how many
drugs get get pushed through under this
criteria that that part was so
interesting yeah that that you know it's
really expensive and hard to run
clinical trials and so you look for what
you call surrogate biomarkers so try to
get some sort of measurement of efficacy
early on and then you don't have to pay
as much and and so yeah that happened
with chemotherapy where you would
measure tumor shrinkage and you wouldn't
measure all median overall survival
right which is the only arbitr that
matters to people especially if you're
going to give them something to diminish
this quality of life so yeah you would
find discrepancies in that where you
would see tumor shrinkage but not
necessarily you know later on when you
were able to measure median overall
survival you wouldn't see an increase in
that and that goes on to this day where
towards the end of life when people are
um you know late stage cancers they'll
do hail often do Hail Mary chemotherapy
regimes where it's well known that that
actually shortens life compared to
pallative you know very good pallative
Hospice Care um so yeah it goes on to
this day and there's a in the 2000s a
targeted therapy called vaston which was
targeted towards vascular entho growth
factor which is a very exciting if you
if you watch the Nightly News back when
that was discovered that was going to be
the cure for cancer these new generation
of drugs so vaston um inhibits that
process the growth of new blood vessels
to supply the tumor they they did that
study in brain cancer and what they
noticed is it blew apart the tumors the
tumor shrank and looked like they were
dissolving almost uh but when you
finally extended the trial it was
approved for that so now it's proove for
brain cancer extend of the trial you
found there was absolutely no increase
in lifespan mhm so so so yeah that that
it's a very it's a sloppy system you
know yeah yeah no it's it's uh it was
pretty mind-blowing to read about that
um Okay so we've kind of given the map
well of of the sematic mutation Theory
and and uh some of the more targeted
therapies and chemotherapies now taking
it to uh you know late 80s early 90s
when Dr Peterson takes up the work of OT
warberg uh what does he discover what is
his his big contribution to the
metabolic theory of cancer and why is it
so
significant yeah so yeah Pete Peterson
he was at John's Hopkins he he when he
stepped into his lab he was interested
in tumor metabolism and it was perfect
because the lab he went into was Albert
leninger who was a guy who discovered
that the mitochondria were the site of
oxidative energy generation and that was
kind of where warberg failed right he
just didn't have the technology to to to
make those discoveries um so it was a
perfect Collision of stepping into the
right Lab at the right time and he was
interested in cancer metabolism
and just what he noticed right away was
the more aggressive a tumor the more
pronounced the warberg effect so the
more of the shift in
metabolism and he delved into where
warberg really left off and warberg was
really unable to
show how damaged the mitochondria were
you know he was even wasn't even able to
approach that question so that's what
Peterson's first really contribution to
you know pick up to where warberg off
was to look at the the mitochondria and
cancer cells and what he noticed is
there were just all kinds of
abnormalities protein abnormalities
lipid abnormalities they were just
unable to generate energy the same way
that healthy mitochondria were and the
other huge contribution that he made was
he really discovered the cause of the
warberg effect is when you get damaged
mitochondria and you get that epigenetic
signal to the nucleus to the DNA you
start expressing different genes
and and the first step in burning sugar
down this G it's called the glycolytic
pathway is an enzyme called hexokinase
which adds a phosphate group to glucose
and so you have four genes for
hexokinase one through four and the way
to think about those genes is they all
do the same thing they do this this
reaction to glucose but they have
different they're just modified in
different ways so think of them like
Snow Tires Tires all do the same
function they they roll um but snow
tires have a certain function street
tires have a certain you know function
so that same way with these
isozymes um what happens in a cancer
cell what h a normal cell has hexokinase
one so glucose gets a phosphate added to
it and then that product builds up and
puts a break on that enzyme so you get a
a regulated amount of sugar burning what
happens when the cancer cell is it
shifts to hexokinase 2 which doesn't
have that break so when glucose
phosphate builds up it doesn't tell the
enzyme to slow down it just keeps
shoving it down that pathway so cancer
cells switch to this enzyme that allows
for the war effect for this this rapid
burning of glucose um the other thing
that enzyme it binds to the m
mitochondria which immortalizes a cell
it inhibits what we call apoptosis or
the ability for it cell to recognize
it's damaged and commit suicide celer
suicide um so it does two of the
Hallmark features of cancer this one
epigenetic shift no mutations required
right uh just damaged mitochondria and
this signal to the nucleus so he picked
and he was doing this obscurity because
everybody was focused on on the sematic
mutation Theory and how exciting it was
to discover mutations in DNA um he was
doing this obscurity no one thought his
work was important and you know I think
Tom safreed was the one that looked back
one of the ones that looked back and
recognized the importance of that work
right yeah I think what you know what we
find ultimately will be significant
about that or maybe was at the time cuz
the tcga hadn't been done yet but this
was present in in all cancer types
correct whereas with the tcga we're
seeing all these different mutations and
all these different cancer types
sometimes no mutations at all sometimes
people have uh mutations where they
logically should have a certain cancer
but they never never develop it versus
with uh what Peterson found is all of
these cancer cells had these damaged
mitochondria and other uh structural
changes to the cell it was it was a
pretty uniform
Target yeah I mean and just from a
common sense view right I mean the most
frequently mutated Gene in cancer is
p-53 and that's in 50% of cancers so you
you say okay well that's clearly an
important mutation but clearly a cancer
cell can survive without it because 50%
of them don't have it so then you look
at what Peterson and warberg were were
looking at and that's ubiquitous the
cancer cells are almost every single
cancer cell is doing that if they're not
doing it they're probably growing
extremely slowly um so from a Common
Sense point of view you'd say well yeah
clearly from a cause effect Association
I would put more weight on the on the
changes that you see continuously right
the ones you see half the time MH yeah
absolutely um so then I I think also the
story is just worth worth telling a bit
it's uh because it's I also want to kind
of talk about it later but uh from
Peterson's work uh he also has a post
come in young heo uh and they kind of
come to this uh this molecule 3bp or
three bromopyruvate uh as as a potential
cancer treatment I don't think we need
to go into the the whole story the whole
story is fascinating and also pretty
tragic um but uh what did three bromo
pyruvate do because I want to kind of
explain the mechanism of that and then
get into maybe what what the future of
that looks like but briefly explain kind
of that that story of 3B 3bp and what
the the outcome was yeah so so yeah Dr
yo yeah she came into Peterson's lab I
think in the 90s um and again he's
looking at okay shifting now to how do
we therapeutically attack this this
shift in metabolism in the cancer cell
um and they clearly they knew that
change to hexokinase was important so
they were trying to go after that Gene
with interfering RNA which is a really
hard technology to do so young Co was
thinking about that in the lab um and
what she realized was okay when you when
you a cancer cell's reverts to the
warberg effect it's generating all this
lactic acid which is poisonous the cell
so it has to relase release that lactic
acid the way it does it is it
upregulates these little pores that
allow lactic acid to to diffuse out of
the cancer cell these are called monoc
carboxilic acid transport proteins MCTS
so the cancer cell has roughly 10 times
more than than a healthy cell so what
this represented to her was a a target a
differentiation between a healthy cell
and a cancer cell and also a door to
where a potential drug could get in um
to a cancer cell so she begins searching
for drugs that looked like lactic acid
and that brought her to to three
bromopyruvate which is extremely you
know similar three-dimensionally to
lactic acid um it had this this very
extraordinarily reactive molecule so pet
Peterson being a biochemist is like no
it's the second you inject that into a
living organism is going to kill them um
so they started the experiments and and
sure enough they found out that it it
did not seem to be toxic to the animals
they were testing it on and it
preferentially got into the cancer cells
uh you know the early experiments were
extraordinary on it and she compared it
to every single chemotherapy developed
in in vitro assays and far in way three
B pyu was a better drug um yeah and that
led to you know going into human human
case study and so forth It's again you
said tragic it is tragic it hasn't been
and develop further because it's
extremely promising drug yeah yeah uh
definitely I want to talk more uh later
on just about kind of what the the
future of Therapeutics in this area
looks like but um I think just to kind
of summarize some of all this for for
everyone because this is where I think
the book made uh such an impact on on on
my thinking is when how you can contrast
uh the image of cancer in the sematic
mutation Theory with the image of cancer
in the
uh metabolic Theory kind of image um
which is again like we were saying
sematic mutation Theory it's just
absolutely you know cancer is this
mind-boggling evasive thing and all of
our language uh is is around that just
how we talk about cancer defeating it
it's a war it's this you know this enemy
um versus when we look at the changes
that happen in the the mitochondria um
from an evolutionary perspective it's
really um I don't want to say you have
like empathy for the cancer cell but it
makes you understand it more of it's
just a normal healthy cell that is
falling back on these uh evolutionary
mechanisms that have been honed over
over millions of years just to try to
survive and the way it does it is is is
absolutely incredible essentially
becoming you know Immortal through some
of these just very I don't want to call
them simple mechanisms but clear
mechanisms that that we know about um
did did you have that same sort of
switch in in your mind when you saw it
like this yeah that I've never heard it
describe that way we should we should
have more empathy for the cancer cells
yeah right no yeah you're absolutely
right they're they're
um yeah it it's because we have a
tendency to anthropomorphize them so
it's 100% And and yeah our our our
language breaks down in a way because we
we we talk in a way about like the
cancer cell wants something it's trying
to do something no it's reverting back
to Old programs
the way you described it right um so
exactly when you look at the way
Evolution happens it build it never
starts a new it builds on itself and the
first biological imperative on the
planet was replicative immortality so
unicellular life the only imperative it
knows is to divide to reproduce
continuously and never stop um so
Evolution built off those that original
program and all those programs in the
cancer cell are are the first programs
of life and and when you look at a
cancer cell it looks extraordinarily
like like an early embryonic cell
they're highly glycolytic same as a
warberg effect they evade the immune
system they're invasive they sweep
around as they're you know establishing
the embryo um they're Immortal early
cancer stem cell or early embryonic stem
cells are are Immortal cells just like
cancer cells so it's these yeah it's
reverting back to these ancient programs
um and in a way yeah right when you when
you look at it through the the metabolic
Theory um it gives you a whole different
therapeutic approach especially with
regard to prevention how do you keep
your mitochondria healthy how do you
avoid you know avoid just avoiding
toxins things like that whereas you
viewed it through the somatic mutation
Theory you view it as this really
process of bad luck that there's not
much you can do about um so yeah it's
it's it opens up a whole new yeah
different language different way of
thinking about what cancer is right and
even I think too with the as you kind of
call this out in the book too that you
know um the metabolic Theory and the
sematic mutation Theory are also they
are sort of uh
intertwined uh which I think also helps
kind of make the sematic mutation Theory
make a bit more sense um in that I I
think you explain it as correct me if
I'm wrong but you can have uh from
carcinogens or environmental things uh
the cells and the mitochondria come
damaged that way uh and then you get the
uh altered metabolism and then the
altered uh transcription and then the
the nucleus becoming damaged and then on
and on and on into cancer um so can you
kind of explain that how how the
metabolic Theory and the sematic
mutation Theory kind of come together
and interwine because I I don't think
they're mutually exclusive right no yeah
and that's why it was so confusing for
scientists because they overlap you know
and and and you don't I never frame it
like one person was right one was wrong
these guys were absolutely brilliant
scientists just you know dry conclusions
from the data they had at the time but
yeah when you look at the way
carcinogens act they they they mutate
DNA um they also damage mitochondria you
know they they do both so so they
overlap in that regard uh same thing
with radiation radiation damages DNA it
also damages mitochondria there's a
beautiful observation made I around
World War II by uh kyell Darlington with
regard to radiation where
he noticed that if you give radiation at
different doses it does different things
so if you give it a dose you can you can
damage DNA and you can also damage
mitochondria you can also give it a
different dose to where it just damages
mitochondria not DNA and he noticed that
the dosage that damaged the cytoplasm
but not DNA also caused cancer so he was
making these first observations of that
overlap at that time but again that was
completely ignored once DNA was
discovered um same thing with yeah with
all all the all the things that cause
cancer also can viruses everything can
also damage mitochondria so you can see
those those initiation of vents were so
hard to distinguish and parse out what
the the the metabolic theory of cancer
is once you damage mitochondria once
energy Generations is damaged to a
certain point the nucleus loses its its
controls of being able to repair DNA and
you get a big generation of free
radicals which damage DNA so it's a it's
a downstream event from the actual
initiation of cancer where then you
start to get these mutations and
nobody's arguing that you know the the
mutations aren't important I think the
best way to say it is that you have a
really hard time saying they offer a
comprehensive explanation for what
cancer is right especially when you have
cancer cells with no mutations that's
where it just kind of breaks down yeah
and I think also what illustrates that
well too is the the Recon study that you
mention in the book where uh you can
probably explain the experiment better
than me but essentially what uh I can't
remember the name of the researchers but
what they did was they took uh damaged
mitochondria from one cell and put it
into a healthy cell and then found that
it eventually degraded the nucleus and
then they took a cancerous uh nucleus uh
from or nucleus from a cancer cell and
put it into a healthy cell with healthy
mitochondria and the the mitochondria in
most of the the samples were able to
kind of uh shut down the the kind of re
signals from from the nucleus yeah that
that was one of the most beautiful
because the the Simplicity of those
experiments right and the fact that the
researchers doing them expected the
exact opposite results so very simply
what they were were they just they asked
the question what is the origin of
cancer is it in the nucleus or is it in
the cytoplasm or the mitochondri are and
the way they did the experiment is they
you can remove a nucleus from a cell so
they removed a nucleus
um of a healthy cell and and transferred
the nucleus of a cancer cell into that
cell so now you have a cell with a
healthy cytoplasm healthy mitochondria
but all the mutations in the DNA and the
nucleus that purportedly were the cause
of cancer so then what they did is they
expanded those cells and injected them
into mice what they expected to see was
these mice explode with tumors so the
first experiment was 68 mice they
injected them with these cells only one
of these mice develop cancer over the
course of a year so that they're utterly
confused and befuddled by it so they did
these series of controls experience
maybe it's a process of just
transferring the nucleus so they did it
with you know a cancer cell and the
nucleus of a cancer cell um same result
then they flipped the experiment took
the a cancer cell removed the nucleus
and put in the nucleus of a healthy cell
into that so now you have the cytoplasm
and all the mitochondria of a cancer
cell but a healthy nucleus with healthy
DNA they expanded those cells injected
them in mice 98% of those mice develop
cancer so the exact opposite result of
what they expected to see so now it was
just this poignant moment of a
beautifully simplistic experiment with
zero bias that answered that question
yeah it said okay clearly the seed of
cancer is somewhere in this side it
didn't necessarily say it was
mitochondria but it was somewhere in the
side they had no idea about the
metabolic Theory at that point mhm um
and I was able to interview those guys
you know at the time and they were they
and they told me that they're absolutely
befuddled by the result and nobody took
them seriously even the NCI cut their
funding off and said well this is going
nowhere right yeah it's we'll we'll get
to that um I so to to bring it closer to
present day I'd love to talk about some
of the work that uh Thomas caed and Dom
dagostino have done and so in terms of
actual Therapeutics obviously we know
about 3B p and I I want to talk more
about maybe what the future of that is
but some of the more I guess I'll call
them practical Therapeutics given that
3bp it's a drug it runs into these
issues of funding and clinical trials
Thomas CED Dom they come up with
this uh press pulse uh therapeutic kind
of idea of the combining the the
ketogenic diet with uh hyperbaric oxygen
would love for you to explain the
ketogenic diet I think people hear that
will kind of make a little bit more
sense if they've been following the
conversation hyperbaric oxygen maybe not
so much so uh maybe explain each of
those two things and then how they how
they come together to form what what
seems like potentially a powerful
therapeutic yeah yeah so when you look
at cancer from that metabolic angle um
and the mitochondria damaged right and
so the mitochondria again are the seat
where oxidative energy generation takes
place so so the food we eat is broken
down that creates a a chain of of
basically electrons which then spin this
atpa wheel make currency energy currency
called
ATP um when they're damaged in the
cancer cell or for whatever reason the
cancer cell is just not using them they
they're they're not generating energy
with oxygen so the the cancer cell again
is is using blood glucose to generate
energy um so the ketogenic diet is a
very very obvious and kind of simplistic
approach to attack that to where you you
shift your diet away from carbohydrate
and towards fat and and what happens in
your body then is it has to shift away
from carbohydrates and blood sugar
towards burning fat and a lot of your
cells can just burn fat through a
process called beta oxidation um there's
a lot of cells also that can't so your
liver will generate these molecules
called Ketone bodies that replace blood
sugar as a source of fuel the difference
is is Ketone bodies have to be burned in
the mitochondria with oxygen so the
theory is you're depriving cancer cells
of their perued fuel glucose and
changing it to this fuel uh ketones that
they have trouble burning right um it's
a you know very obvious simplistic
approach and the first studies in mice
are extraordinarily promising almost
every Cancer type when you get put them
on a ketogenic diet their survival
increases the Press pulls is this idea
well okay now the cell is stressed
because of the ketogenic diet the cancer
cell is is struggling to generate energy
a lot of the problems cancer cell
encounters when it has less energy is is
oxidation stuff so it's generating free
radicals it needs energy to deal with
these free radicals um doesn't have it
so so you add in oxidative therapies and
that's what hyperbaric oxygen is is when
you press with oxygen you generate more
free radicals cancer cells already on
this you know oxidative Edge and and
they begin to die that way that was the
first iteration of of press PSE now it's
really you know morphed into lots of
other types of pharmaceuticals um drugs
that inhibit glutamine cancer cells can
that's their second fuel source is
glutamine um yeah from that time I wrote
the book till today there's been you
know a lot of progress in in
particularly safer's lab with regard to
this press pulse type strategy mhm yeah
and I think there's also you mentioned
that that flip side of ketones too where
not only are they making the cancer cell
more vulnerable to some of these uh
therapies that that produce more
reactive oxygen species but they're also
uh buffering healthy cells from those
effect and kind of protecting them in
that way which is this really
interesting kind of dual use for for
ketones and cancer therapy beautiful
yeah I mean absolutely beautiful like
for for people getting chemotherapy or
radiation um yeah it sets up this
beautiful therapeutic different
differential where the cancer cells are
stressed but the healthy cells be
because Ketone bodies are are there's
more thermodynamic energy per carbon
unit so they're very very efficient good
source of energy and when a healthy cell
burns them they're able to to Really
bolster their antioxidant um potential
so when you come come when when you're
getting radiation the healthy cells are
are able to deal with that oxidative
radiation so much better and and there's
some beautiful experiments on that where
um with mice when you give M you can
give mice a lethal dose of radiation
it's called ld7 so the dose is high
enough that 70% of the mice will die
from that radiation dose when you give
them a ketone supplement so not even the
ketogenic diet but just a ketone
supplement um none of those mice diet
wow so that's how how effective putting
ketones into your metabolism is able to
to resist radiation damage they they did
a study wter Longo you probably read
that James where he just had patients
fast before
chemotherapy um and he had a just a
brutal time getting the the study done
because the oncologist wouldn't didn't
want them to do it it's like no no these
patients are already sick and weak they
need to come into chemotherapy you know
fully fueled and eating so he finally
convinced enough of him to do this trial
and they he had him fast 48 to 78 hours
72 hours before
chemotherapy so that that's the quickest
way to get into ketosis right
and the the the reduction in side
effects was astonishing and the number
of side effects that you can objectively
measure like vomiting went from I think
on average seven a day and the the
people who didn't fast to to zero the
patients that had fasted did not vomit
so yeah you know Ju Just from a quality
of life perspective these therapeutic
ideas should be explored but yeah we
need to do the trials to see how far it
changes the median survival too yeah no
it's fascinating and then even um I I
found it very interesting in the book
too and uh James Watson is is kind of
the through line through the book The
you know the father of one of the
fathers of of DNA discovery of DNA and I
believe he even had had come out and
said that his his belief uh now after
after kind of focusing or shifting his
attention and uh really making a call
for a lot of other researchers to shift
their attention to the metabolism of
cancer is that uh a lot of these
chemotherapies radiation they kind of
the main uh effect that he he's possibly
proposing is that they were actually
just overburdening the cancer cells with
reactive oxygen species and that's how
they were pushing them over the edge and
of course in the context of you know a
normal diet or none of these other
therapies you're also uh pushing healthy
cells over the edge but you know it's
obviously affecting cancer cells
somewhat preferentially there yeah yeah
yeah he did have a kind of profound
shift you know some beautiful quotes
that I was able to use in the book like
if you could go back um he'd study
biochemistry instead of molecular
biology yeah the days of warberg and um
yeah he he really had a profound shift
the 2012 he wrote a paper called
oxidants antioxidants in the current
incurability of metastatic cancer which
kind of was was you know kind of this
frame shift for him um to where he he
yeah
he just that the targeted therapies The
Way We Were approaching it was a failure
and probably never going to work we're
never going to get the AL arsenal of
drugs that would cure cancer going down
that road and wrote this this beautiful
paper about how we should shift towards
looking at metabolism and this this
incredibly important Redux this ratio
you're talking about between oxidants
and antioxidants in cancer cells as a
way to attack them and yeah this the
first iteration of all these metabolic
therapies that really um you can look at
it from a fuel perspective you're taking
away the Cancer's preferred fuels but
perhaps a better way to look at it is
through that lens of oxidants and
antioxidants
yeah so you talk about yeah James Watson
he he has this shift which I've you know
I've read a bunch of different books on
different parts of medical history and
then reading your book curable uh you
realize how how rare that is actually
for people to you know actually take a
step back and kind of shift especially
when their uh whole life's work has been
um in you know some some research area
so I wanted to ask you just like you
know how much of the
uh staying power of of the sematic
mutation theory has to do with just you
know just sunk costs of you know money
time research all the stuff people not
wanting to kind of um undig their their
heels on these things um and then what
does it actually take to see this this
paradigm shift in medicine because
obviously you know Watson has this shift
and you know we mentioned sartha Muki
earlier and you end the book I I found
it uh it kind of funny cuz the book ends
with you you know pointing out that he
has this uh entrenched belief in the
sematic mutation Theory but I believe or
I presume that has actually changed
because he's involved now with a company
uh you may have heard of called fight
Therapeutics which is focusing on the
metabolism of cancer so I assume he's
changed his mind as well so what you
know what does a figure like him and
like Watson do for creating this
paradigm shift to getting the um more of
the cancer research community and the
The Physician Community to say okay and
even the patient Community say okay
we're going to take this seriously and
direct our efforts towards it yeah no
that's a beautiful question and you
could probably write a PhD thesis
psychological thesis on that question
alone yeah um yeah the beautiful irony
with that was yeah faith I I can't
pronoun Faith Therapeutics faith I think
it's fith fight yeah okay yeah yeah
which is well you know instead of
calling a ketogenic diet they call it an
insulin suppressing diet I believe which
is the same thing right um yeah it's a
switch towards met you know looking at
the attacking cancer from a metabolic
angle depriving it of certain amino
acids shifting certain fuels away in a
dietary manner um the same thing with
Bert vogelstein he he again was one of
the architects of the somatic mutation
theory he was one of the main guys doing
the the sequencing in the cancer genome
Atlas project at John's Hopkins he now
has a company cage biofarma which is at
um Nano particles of three bromo
pyu so again targeting cancer through
metabolism yeah it it's and then again
you you'll the textbooks haven't changed
you know oncologists I was going to ask
you that what what the status of that
was and there was a great interview
podcast interview a few months ago where
the whoever the podcast host was they
had one of the main guys in cancer
genetics debate Tom safreed and and it
was shocking to me I can't remember his
name but he was absolutely befuddled
that somebody would not believe in the
somatic mutation Theory like he had just
not read outside anything else that's
going on you know that he was just
completely
dogmatically convinced I I think it's in
the middle now James there is so many
the younger generation is coming up that
is much more
open-minded to and I wouldn't say we
know what cancer is I I I think that
what we can say again is what I would
say is the somatic mutation Theory does
not offer a comprehensive explanation
for what cancer is and so we're at this
kind of uncomfortable middle point where
um people are trying to figure this out
from different angles but yeah we're
we're right in that point and this is
not unprecedented in science right there
was there's been long periods where
these big questions went were unknown
and people were sorting it out the the
way the cell generates energy through
oxy metabolism for decades that was
called the oxos wars where this guy
Peter Mitchell proposed this idea well
no in the mitochondria there's this new
type of chemistry where there's
electrons going from one protein to the
next and that pumps hydrogen atoms like
an air compressor into the mitochondria
and then that the pre it's called a
chemo osmotic gradient and that
generates ATP and people thought he was
insane and that went on for decades and
and fights would break out at
conferences about that um so so yeah
it's not unprecedented we're still but
yeah there's been a definite shift there
there's much more open-mindedness at
even major Cancer Centers my Foundation
is doing a a huge trial on the ketogenic
diet in Cleo blastoma at Cedar cyanide
oh wow and five different centers um
around the US so so very you know
incredible high-profile places and it
would took a young a young neuro
oncologist to come along and realize the
potential in this whereas before you
know when I first wrote the book there
was no chance of that right yeah I mean
I think that makes sense what you're
saying it's it's definitely so I'm you
know I'm I'm 26 and you know I know
people from probably my age a little bit
younger and then into their mid-30s are
are you know we're just much more I
think attuned to a lot of more things
that are going on in just health and
wellness and science and medicine
whether that's out of pure interest and
there's just more information out there
that's accessible or it's just kind of
uh you know it's hitting you over the
head with you know every athletic greens
and all these things and you're kind of
just uh absorbing it by osmosis of like
I should be paying more attention to
this sort of stuff and and it's probably
frustration right because you you see
the cost of some of these therapies and
you realize that cancer has been this
way for you know a hundred years where
if it's going to win it's going to win
there's very little we can do for a
stage four patient um you know that's
not to resign hope of course there's
exceptions but but you you see the
commercials you see the the medical
community and they just keep pounding
their head against the same framework
and wall and and bankrupting people with
the cost of these therapies and there's
no change so it's probably a bit of you
know not wanting to put up with the
status quo like like you have like we
have right absolutely yeah um yeah and I
think too I think probably your your
estimation of we're right in the middle
makes sense um I I thought it was It was
kind of interesting too earlier this
week if uh I don't know if you saw the
clip uh at the inauguration you had
Larry Ellison talking about uh what was
he talking about uh cancer vaccines for
everyone in with AI and and all that um
which to me kind of had Echoes of of
kind of sematic mutation Theory and and
targeted Gene approaches and so you kind
of see the these different generations
and different ideas still um coexisting
with one another and maybe fighting it
out but um but yeah that that sounds
about right to me um so bringing it now
to just kind of the the future um where
does this go from here who is kind of
pioneering uh Therapies in the space
outside of maybe Thomas C freed and Dom
dagasa with what they're doing or maybe
there's something new that they're doing
that isn't mentioned in the book I'm
sure there is um and and kind of what
does uh adoption of this look like cuz
you know like you say in the book too
you know hard to see pharmaceutical
companies having much of an interest in
this obviously cuz at at the base level
you're talking about pretty cheap uh
Therapeutics here with a ketogenic diet
obviously you have to you know find a
way to reimburse a dietitian for their
time ketogenic diet a true ketogenic
diet is not very easy to follow um and
then hyperbaric oxygen again relatively
cheap compared to a lot of these these
drugs so um what does adoption look like
what are the incentives that are kind of
fighting against that adoption and how
do we maybe align that towards greater
adoption in the future that's a great
question it's it's an interesting add an
interesting point and what it reminds me
of if you read carable you'll remember
this but um it reminds me of of uh uh
fecal transplants for for CDF infections
right and so the story with that is for
your listeners is uh C diff is a
horrible intestinal infection that you
get typically in the hospital if you're
in the hospital for I think three weeks
you have a 50/50 chance of getting CDE
um and it's a it's a bacterial
intestinal infection in colon that's
really hard to get rid of so the first
line therapy is antibiotics and that
works about 75% of the time if that
doesn't work the second round of
antibiotics has even less of a chance I
think like a 30% chance of working at
that point so the end stage of a C diff
infection if if you fail these
antibiotic therapies is is horrible you
literally just get eaten from the inside
your organs and then your organs fail I
think about over 15,000 people a year
die from that that way so it's a
horrible problem
what people noticed and the first study
on this was done in the 40s where a guy
in Denver a surgeon did a feal
transplant so all that is is taking
feces from a healthy person and giving
mixing it a blender and giving it via
enema to the to the person with seev so
he did this for for dissenter and some
of his surgical patients and it worked
and he published a study so a few
doctors caught wind of that you know in
the decades past that and and did it and
it worked veterinarians were doing it by
by the by the 2000s it was pretty well
known that fecal transplants work but
the medical community was not going to
mix crap in a blender they they were
going to keep using antibiotics so it
popped up as a DYI on the on the web and
people you know thousands of people were
doing this online to cure themselves a
CF they finally did a clinical trial and
98% of the people were cured doing a
fecal transplant the the 2% that weren't
they just did it again and it worked
so they actually stopped the trial and
and gave the antibiotic arm feal
transplants now they do it in hospitals
they do fecal transplants but it took
forever and people were doing it on
their own that's exactly where we are
with cancer therapies is people are
doing ketogenic diets on their own most
of the time the oncologists tell them
it's a waste of time what happened with
our our trial at Cedar cyanide is the
the neuro oncologist so many people were
coming to him with bra cancer doing a
ketogenic diet he could not help but
just observe the fact that they were
having less seizures less side effects
they just seem to be doing much better
so he became interested in it and did a
phase one trial um the phase one trial
was not meant to Major lifespan but they
did and and in it they they noticed
close to a doubling of overall lifespan
which is unprecedented for brain cancer
like
gasom um that led him to this Phase 2
trial that we're doing now right so
that's that's the same it's reminds me
of the fecal transplant exactly where
people there's a ground swell of people
that just kind of
realize through the lens of risk reward
with cancer why wouldn't you try this
you know it's simple it's a diet why
wouldn't you try this so so people are
doing this and the the you know the
reluctancy of the medical community they
don't know how to adopt this especially
until you know conclusive evidence or
clinical trials is done and that's my
hope as we get these trials done and
they're conclusive enough that we start
to see adoption from the medical
community right yeah and I think too I
mean I I could almost see an emergent
adoption of something like this CU you
know mitochondrial dysfunction obviously
isn't isn't uh solely relevant to to
cancer it's it's relevant to to many
other uh diseases and processes of of
aging and I think that is some something
that is is maybe becoming a little bit
more uh common knowledge I mean I see
kind of in my own circles and stuff
friends who were you know casual uh
Runners and things like that who were
becoming interested in in in V2 Max and
all these performance kind of maximizing
metrics of their their health which uh
is all kind of you know also Downstream
of of mitochondrial function and this
and that and so uh I think it you know
we we could potentially see some sort of
uh emergent adoption or or awareness of
this especially for from like you said
some of the younger generations of
people yeah you guys' generation is Fant
I yeah I'm a huge I got a son who's 25
so right in your age and um yeah that
your generation less drinking you know I
mean I mean think of the the adult smoke
smoking rate in 1950 was was 50% half of
adults smoked and you never see anyone
in your generation smoking so yeah
there's a huge awareness of Health I
think in the younger generation that's
moving up um and that lends itself to
you know when you look at heart disease
versus cancer in the 20s heart disease
was far in away the biggest killer in in
the US and that's dropped by over 50%
where cancer rates have continued
decline so you know in the
pharmaceutical company we just have this
this Mantra of coming at cancer once it
developed how do we cure cancer well the
better question would be how do we
prevent cancer in the first place what
does that look like um you know
pharmaceutical company pivoted with
cardiovascular disease pivoted towards
hypertensive drugs which are very good
drugs for the pre prevention of heart
disease um noticing what what things
mattered vitamin D vitamin k um and the
results were dramatic and so with cancer
what kind of protocols would prevent
cancer what about like a a three-day
fast with a large dose of C like things
like metformin or you know non-toxic
drugs that would because we know cancer
takes decades to develop to to kill
those fermenting cells early
um I would love to see a shift towards
that kind of mindset you know it's going
to take your generation to do that mhm
yeah um so bringing it to I I just want
to Circle back real quick with um just
what other what other therapies what
other exciting things or maybe on the
horizon kind of what's the status of 3bp
right now I would actually love to know
I know uh Dr Co she started uh co-
discoveries I think it's called her own
company to kind of further 3bp but is
that in a FDA pipeline at all is there
anything happening with that are there
other drugs similar a very tragic story
she did have funding with the South
Korean company and it was going starting
clinical trials and that company then
went bankrupt so they had to discontinue
so that really put a huge stop to it
then they they squabbled about the
intellectual property rights after that
um then she did get FDA approval for a
clinical trial and and so it it's just
awaiting funding right now uh but again
there's other companies going after
different formulations for 3bp no nobody
knows which formulation will be the best
in the end but um they're they're
looking for funding for clinical trials
too um other therapies you know uh what
excites me a lot is really capturing the
full potential of the pharmacopia
meaning the the 25 or 2,500 drugs
existing drugs out there um you know a
molecule doesn't care what it's labeled
if it's a diabetes drug or a cancer drug
or and a lot most of these small
molecules affect about 12 different
Pathways so we're leaving a huge amount
of potential on the table with regard to
drug repurposing and that's one of the
thrusts with with the sort of different
view of cancer is how do we use these
drugs to um approach cancer from
different angles and there's lots of
them like metformin that do things
metabolically uh so so yeah re realizing
the full potential of drug repurposing
in cancer is another exciting Avenue
right now right yeah you mentioned that
in in curable how they discovered that
through patients who were on metform and
type two diabetes patients who by you
know all the data should be at greater
risk of getting cancer but that when
they were on Metformin were were
suffering from lower rates of cancer
than people without uh type 2 diabetes
which is which is fascinating remarkable
yeah remarkable yeah um okay so to kind
of just bring it to to some of the work
that that you're doing uh would love to
just hear more about uh yeah your two
the foundation for metabolic cancer
therapies and then care oncology you
give us some of the insight into the
trials that are going on but how do
those two organizations differ actually
if at all and what's kind of the
different work that goes on there yeah
well the foundation is a 51 C3 nonprofit
Research Foundation so yeah we what that
what we do there is is just fun
interesting trials on on the mission
statement is on the metabolic Theory
cancer so the big one right now is that
trial at Cedar cyanide that's ongoing
right now and that's um 80 patients in
the treatment group uh giving a
ketogenic diet in addition to standard
of care for for Glo blastoma so that'll
be exciting when we get the results on
that um the the car oncology actually
got bought by a different company and
then I I stepped away from that what
what we did initially was four um drugs
for cancer so so drugs that act
metabolically repurpose drugs so common
drugs like metformin loto Statin
lipophilic statins that's more into
another company called asteron Health um
and what we do there is we look at a
patient's genomic profile so we look at
all the mutations and we don't look at
we look at these mutations as
vulnerabilities in the cancer cell right
they are damaged to the function
cellular functionality we're not making
a claim on the causality of cancer at
all but there's a concept in cancer
therapies called synthetic lethality
when there is a mutation especially to a
tumor suppressor Gene
the cell has to revert to to rely on
other Pathways to compensate for that
damage so if you target the other
pathway it results in what they call
synthetic lethality or cell death um we
look at a patient's genomic profile we
match the synthetically lethal Gene
Pairs and then we match it to drug
repurposing so there may not be a cancer
approved therapeutic to Target that Gene
that the pathway we're after but it
could be something like aspirin or a
natural product like orsolic acid or
could be metformin so we we're agnostic
to what a you know the labeling of a
drug we just look at what pathways are
the most vulnerable in the cancer cell
in this specific patients and what
repurposed drug could potentially be
useful and I think it's important
because when people have cancer they'll
go to the internet and there's you know
there's potentially hundreds of
different things they can do and people
will a lot of people will take they're
taking 20 30 different supplements this
is a way to narrow that list down to
what
potentially which ones could be the most
effective for that
individual right yeah okay that's
fascinating yeah I think that's you know
incredibly important work because I I do
think too um you know I think part of
people's maybe resistance to the idea of
metabolic theory of cancer or or some on
its face if you were to just Ultra
simplify it and say eat less sugar don't
get cancer or or mitigate the the uh
effects of of cancer sound SS too good
to be true or it sounds like something
you would read on an article somewhere
or even you know the famous case of you
know Steve Jobs going with with a lot of
different kind of alternative routes for
for his cancer and ultimately succumbing
to it um but to have people like like
yourself and others who are doing you
know very serious rigorous uh scientific
work in this area and I think also your
book does a great job of it and you did
a great job of it in this conversation
but need more people to really uh
explain the the the mechanisms and and
the science behind behind all this cuz
it's it's all there uh if you just take
some some time to to understand it and
it also that's why it is so exciting um
and so I think that's just that's
amazing work yeah thanks James yeah no
people like you that bring light to it
too yeah people it's important to to
take an interest in your health because
it's it's really all that matters how
you feel in a given day is one of the
most you know night and day it's it's
it's what your life it's happiness it's
what your life is yeah so yeah just to
focus on on what are the things that
truly matter um to to your health and
well-being and usually it's the simplest
things it's diet you know you have over
2,000 reactions going on in each cell
and they require co-actors so you you
just want to make sure you have the
optimal amount of the right vitamins and
minerals it's that simple um sunlight uh
the importance of social connections
can't be understated that's one of the
biggest determin determinance of
longevity for people so yeah just the
the the simple things matter the most
yeah absolutely um well this has been
great Travis uh before we get out of
here where can uh people find you is
there actually is there any way people
can um contribute uh to the to the
foundation any kind of help that can be
given there like what um what do you
want to leave people with here oh yeah
thanks for that yeah the foundation is
the the website is the foundation for
metabolic cancer therapies okay and yeah
it's there there's information on the
site you can donate right from from the
website um and yeah beyond that uh you
know I I I anybody can reach me on
Twitter or social media if they want to
um or through the foundation website
yeah thanks for bringing that up okay
great yeah I'll put the the link to that
in in the description for this um but
okay that'll that'll do it so thank you
so much Travis thank you for taking the
time and uh yeah this was this was great
yeah wonderful appreciate the
conversation thanks awesome thank you